[workers] postgres + postgrest tutorial (#1573)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: products/workers/src/content/tutorials/postgres/index.md

highlight: [5]
---
router.get('/users', async () => {
  // Existing code
})

router.all('*', () => new Response("Not Found", { status: 404 }))
```

Our second planned route is `GET /users/:id`, which should return a single user based on their ID. We can set this up by configuring another route, which uses _parameters_ to capture part of the URL and make it available as part of our route handler as an object `params`:

```js
---
file: index.js
---
router.get('/users/:id', async ({ params } => {
  const { id } = params
  console.log(id) // e.g. 5, if route is /users/5
})
```

With the ID captured as the variable `id`, we can use `postgrest-js` to select from our `users` table again, but with an added _filter_ that requires any returned users have a matching ID. This will effectively limit our response to a single user, such as a user with an ID of 1. To do this, we'll add a new `filter` clause to the beginning of some very familiar `postgrest-js` code:

```js
---
file: index.js
highlight: [3, 4, 5, 6]
---
router.get('/users/:id', async ({ params }) => {
  const { id } = params
  const { data, error } = await client
    .from('users')
    .select()
    .eq('id', id)
})
```

> By implementing this, we should get a JSON array of users back, but since it will be filtering based on ID, it can either have be an empty array (when no user is found), or an array with a single item (a user was found). Based on this, we can complete this route handler by returning a JSON object with a key `user`, which is either `null` or the object returned from PostgREST for our found user:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By implementing this, we should get a JSON array of users back, but since it will be filtering based on ID, it can either be an empty array (when no user is found), or an array with a single item (a user was found). Based on this, we can complete this route handler by returning a JSON object with a key `user`, which is either `null` or the object returned from PostgREST for our found user:
```

```js
---
file: index.js
highlight: [8, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15]
---
router.get('/users/:id', async ({ params }) => {
  const { id } = params
  const { data, error } = await client
    .from('users')
    .select()
    .eq('id', id)

  if (error) throw error

  const user = data.length ? data[0] : null

  return new Response(JSON.stringify({ user }), {
    headers: { 'content-type': 'application/json' },
    status: user ? 200 : 404
  })
})
```

> Deploy your function again with `wrangler publish`, and you should now be able to look up users based on their ID, such as `/users/1`. If there's a user in the database with that given ID, you'll get a JSON response (with a status of `200 Found`) containing the user data, otherwise the JSON response will be a `null` value (with a status of `404 Not Found`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploy your function again with `wrangler publish`, and you should now be able to look up users based on their ID, such as `/users/1`. If there's a user in the database with that given ID, you'll get a JSON response (with a status of `200 OK`) containing the user data, otherwise the JSON response will be a `null` value (with a status of `404 Not Found`):
```

```json
---
header: JSON object for a found user based on ID
---

> {"user":{"id":1,"name":"Kristian"}}

Reviewer: Wouldn't this just be `{"id":1,"name":"Kristian"}` without the `{"user":...}` wrapper? Although presumably you ran the code and got this, so just ignore me if I'm wrong.

Author: great question! this is a preference - IMO having the structure be `{ user: $userData }` is more explicit, you can always rely on that key being there whether it's null or not, instead of having to check if the entire JSON payload is either an object or null.... that being said, if you find it confusing, that's good feedback and i'm happy to change it around if you think it overcomplicates things!

Reviewer: I was less asking about what we prefer -- either is fine with me -- and more asking whether this is actually whether this is the format the PostgREST returns it in. It isn't at all obvious to me that lines 300-302 actually cause the response to look like this. Based on how the data returned by PostgREST looks in the above example that returns all users, I'd be surprised if this chunk of example code as written returns the response in this format.

Reviewer 2: There is a `JSON.stringify({ user })` in place, which is what's creating the `{ user: $userdata }` object format

Reviewer: Ha, sorry, I shouldn't comment on any funny-looking JS without trying it first 🤦

---
router.post('/users', async request => {
  const userData = await request.json()
})
```

With that data available as `userData`, we can use the `insert` function to create a new user in our database. `postgrest-js` will return the new user back from PostgREST, so we can return that user as the JSON response back to the client:

```js
---
file: index.js
highlight: [2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10]
---
router.post('/users', async request => {
  const userData = await request.json()
  const { data: user, error } = await client
    .from('users')
    .insert([userData])

  if (error) throw error

  return new Response(JSON.stringify({ user }), {
    headers: { 'content-type': 'application/json' },
  })
})
```

Deploy the updated function using `wrangler publish`. To test this new endpoint, we can use `cURL`, a command-line tool for making requests. Copy the below command, replacing the base part of the URL with your unique Workers.dev deployment. The response back should be a new user:

```sh
---
header: Creating a new user using cURL
---
$ curl https://postgrest-worker-example.signalnerve.workers.dev/users \
  -X POST \
  -H "Content-type: application/json" \
  -d '{"name": "Dog"}'

> {"user":{"id":2,"name":"Dog"}}

Reviewer: Same question as above about the output

Author: ditto my previous response!

```

## Conclusion

> In this tutorial, you've used PostgREST, `postgrest-js`, and Cloudflare Workers to build a serverless API for your PostgreSQL database. This architecture provides an infinitely-scaling and secure approach to interfacing between your databases and your frontend applications, while still retaining the control and flexibility of staying locked out of Database-as-a-Service tools and other complicated SDKs for data management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you've used PostgREST, `postgrest-js`, and Cloudflare Workers to build a serverless API for your PostgreSQL database. This architecture provides an infinitely-scaling and secure approach to interfacing between your databases and your frontend applications, while still retaining the control and flexibility of avoiding lock-in to Database-as-a-Service tools and other complicated SDKs for data management.
```

---
updated: 2021-06-10
difficulty: Intermediate

> content_type: "💾 Storage"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
content_type: "💾 Storage"
pcx-content-type: tutorial
```

---

# Build data-driven applications with Workers and PostgreSQL

## Overview

Many applications for the web are built using industry standards like [PostgreSQL](https://postgresql.org), an open-source SQL database. Instead of directly connecting your user interface to that database, it is common for developers to use a backend server to format and proxy API requests to that database. Instead of building a backend server for this task, you will make use of Cloudflare Workers and recent improvements to the PostgreSQL developer experience—namely, [PostgREST](https://postgrest.org): a REST API built specifically for PostgreSQL. By doing this, you will handle API requests to your database without needing to maintain another piece of infrastructure.

In this tutorial, you will explore how to integrate with PostgREST and PostgreSQL using Workers.

![Example GIF](./example.gif)

## Prerequisites

To effectively learn from this tutorial, you should have an instance of PostgreSQL configured. In addition, you will need to install PostgREST, a separate service that provides REST API access to your Postgres database.

> If you want a quick way to get up and running with these tools, check out [postgres-postgrest-cloudflared-example](https://github.com/signalnerve/postgres-postgrest-cloudflared-example/), an example project that uses `docker-compose` to set up a PostgreSQL database, PostgREST, and `cloudflared`, which exposes the PostgREST endpoint to the internet for use in your Workers function.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want a quick way to get up and running with these tools, refer to [postgres-postgrest-cloudflared-example](https://github.com/signalnerve/postgres-postgrest-cloudflared-example/), an example project that uses `docker-compose` to set up a PostgreSQL database, PostgREST, and `cloudflared`, which exposes the PostgREST endpoint to the Internet for use in your Workers function.
```

In order to continue with the tutorial, ensure that you have a publicly accessible URL for your PostgREST endpoint.

## Create a Workers function

> Begin by creating a new Workers function, using `wrangler generate`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Begin by creating a new Workers function, running `wrangler generate`:
```

```sh
---
header: Create a Workers function
---
$ wrangler generate postgrest-example
$ cd postgrest-example
```

Inside of your Workers function, configure `wrangler.toml` with your account ID. Change the `type` value to "webpack" to use `webpack` for bundling the Workers function:

```toml
---
filename: wrangler.toml
highlight: [2, 3, 4]
---
name = "postgrest-worker-example"
type = "webpack"

account_id = "yourAccountId"
```

## Build an API using postgrest-js

PostgREST provides a consistent REST API structure for use in your applications. Each _table_ in your PostgreSQL database has a separate path as `/:table_name`. Query parameters are used to do lookups in your database—for instance, to find all users with an ID of `1`, you make a `GET` request to `/users?id=eq.1`.

> The URL structure makes it great for exploration, but in an application, it would be great to have something easier to use. [postgrest-js](https://github.com/supabase/postgrest-js/) is an open-source package that wraps PostgREST in an expressive JavaScript API. You will use it in your project to build a few endpoints to work with your PostgreSQL database in a Workers function.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The URL structure makes it great for exploration, but in an application, it would be better to have something easier to use. [postgrest-js](https://github.com/supabase/postgrest-js/) is an open-source package that wraps PostgREST in an expressive JavaScript API. You will use it in your project to build a few endpoints to work with your PostgreSQL database in a Workers function.
```

Begin by installing `postgrest-js`:

```sh
---
header: Installing postgrest-js
---
$ npm install @supabase/postgrest-js
```

> Before you will begin working with `postgrest-js` in your application, you need to quickly patch `cross-fetch`, the internal tool that `postgrest-js` uses for making HTTP requests, with Workers' built-in `fetch` API. Do this by creating a custom Webpack config, and updating `wrangler.toml` to use it. Create `webpack.config.js` with the below configuration:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before working with `postgrest-js` in your application, you need to quickly patch `cross-fetch`, the internal tool that `postgrest-js` uses for making HTTP requests, with Workers' built-in `fetch` API. Do this by creating a custom Webpack config, and updating `wrangler.toml` to use it. Create `webpack.config.js` with the below configuration:
```

Reviewer 3: Why the use of the word 'quickly'? Is there a time constraint?

Author: great question! it's more of a "this will only take a second to fix" sort of thing

```js
---
filename: webpack.config.js
---
module.exports = {
  target: "webworker",
  entry: "./index.js",
  externals: [
    { 'cross-fetch': 'fetch' }
  ]
}
```

In `wrangler.toml`, define the `webpack_config` key, and use your new file as the value:

```toml
---
filename: wrangler.toml
highlight: [3]
---
name = "postgrest-worker-example"
type = "webpack"
webpack_config = "webpack.config.js"

account_id = "yourAccountId"
```

With the Webpack build configured, `postgrest-js` is ready to be used inside of your new Workers function. In `index.js`, import the package, and set up a new instance of `PostgrestClient`. Note that the `POSTGREST_ENDPOINT` is a placeholder for the publicly accessible PostgREST endpoint mentioned earlier in this tutorial:

```js
---
filename: index.js
highlight: [1, 2]
---
import { PostgrestClient } from '@supabase/postgrest-js'
const client = new PostgrestClient(POSTGREST_ENDPOINT)

addEventListener('fetch', event => {
// ... Rest of code
```

> With a new client set up, you will make your first request from inside the Workers function to your PostgREST endpoint. To do this, you will _select_ data from a table inside of your database, using the `from` and `select` functions in `postgrest-js`. In the below example, I will use the `users` table, and select everything inside of it, though if you are bringing your own PostgreSQL setup to this tutorial, adjust the code accordingly. Replace the default code in `handleRequest` with the below code:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With a new client set up, you will make your first request from inside the Workers function to your PostgREST endpoint. To do this, you will _select_ data from a table inside of your database, using the `from` and `select` functions in `postgrest-js`. The below example uses the `users` table, and selects everything inside of it, though if you are bringing your own PostgreSQL setup to this tutorial, adjust the code accordingly. Replace the default code in `handleRequest` with the below code:
```

Reviewer 3: Blog posts can have "I" statements because the reader can see who wrote the post, but tutorials/documentation should avoid "I" statements in examples.

```js
---
filename: index.js
---
// ... Rest of code

async function handleRequest(request) {
  const { data, error } = await client
    .from('users')
    .select()
  
  if (error) throw error

  return new Response(JSON.stringify(data), {
    headers: {
      'Content-type': 'application/json'
    }
  })
}
```

This code is identical to making a `GET` request to `/users` on your PostgREST endpoint. In this example, the function returns the `data` object back from `postgrest-js` to the client, as JSON.

To publish this function, run `wrangler publish`:

```sh
---
header: Publish the Workers function
---
$ wrangler publish
✨  Built successfully, built project size is 3 KiB.
✨  Successfully published your script to
 https://postgrest-worker-example.signalnerve.workers.dev
```

> To correctly configure the function, set a `POSTGREST_ENDPOINT` "secret", which tells Workers where to actually route requests to. `wrangler secret` is a command that sets an encrypted value, or "secret", that is only available inside of the Workers function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To correctly configure the function, set a `POSTGREST_ENDPOINT` "secret", which tells Workers where to actually route requests to. `wrangler secret` is a command that sets an encrypted value, or a "secret", that is only available inside of the Workers function:
```

Reviewer 3: @lukeed, if 'secret' is part of a command, isn't the 'a' not necessary here? it would be like writing 'a `wrangler generate`'

Reviewer 2: The phrase is tied to `an encrypted value`. So for consistency the phrase ([and items in a list](https://www.businesswritingblog.com/business_writing/2010/06/what-i-learned-from-sunny-a-korean-writer.html) - random link) should have an article repeated.

```sh
$ wrangler secret put POSTGREST_ENDPOINT
Enter the secret text you'd like assigned to the variable POSTGREST_ENDPOINT on the script named postgrest-worker-example:
**************
🌀  Creating the secret for script name postgrest-worker-example
✨  Success! Uploaded secret POSTGREST_ENDPOINT.
```

Visit the Workers function in browser (such as `https://postgrest-worker-example.signalnerve.workers.dev`). It returns a simple JSON array of your PostgreSQL data:

```json
---
header: JSON array returning from PostgREST in a Workers function
---
[{"id":1,"name":"Kristian"}]
```

### Adding a router

> To make this project more interesting, you will add a router to handle multiple potential paths in the application. The application will have one path which returns _all_ users, a path that returns a single user _based on ID_, and a path that accepts data and creates a user. The URL structure will look like this:

Reviewer 3: 'Interesting' is an opinionated adjective. Does this mean this part is optional? Or is this an essential part of the tutorial?

Author: good question, the idea i guess is "to make this project _do more_" or have more functionality - open to whatever format you think makes sense there

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To increase the functionality of this project, you can add a router to handle multiple potential paths in the application. The application will have one path which returns _all_ users, a path that returns a single user _based on ID_, and a path that accepts data and creates a user. The URL structure will look like this:
```

Reviewer 3: @signalnerve how about that?

```js
---
filename: index.js
---
router.get('/users', async () => {
  const { data, error } = await client.from('users').select()
  if (error) throw error

  return new Response(JSON.stringify({ users: data }), {
    headers: { 'content-type': 'application/json' },
  })
})
```

With the first route configured, the Workers function needs to pass requests off to the `router`. To do this, remove the `handleRequest` function, and call `router.handle` in the `fetch` event listener directly:

```js
---
filename: index.js
highlight: [4, 11, 12, 13, 14]
---
const router = Router()

addEventListener('fetch', event => {
  event.respondWith(router.handle(event.request))
})

router.get("/users", () => {
  // PostgREST code
})

// Delete the below function in your code entirely
async function handleRequest(request) {
  // Old PostgREST code
}
```

Deploy the new version of the function with `wrangler publish`. The previous code now runs at `/users`, and returns a JSON array of users:

```json
---
header: Updated JSON object returning users in a Workers function
---
{"users":[{"id":1,"name":"Kristian"}]}
```

> You will notice that the original path at `/`, or _the root_, now has nothing configured. A client visiting this URL causes the function to throw an exception. To fix this, use `itty-router`'s `all` method, which acts as a catch-all for any routes not explicitly handled by other route handlers. Return a new `404 Not Found` response for any route not recognized:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Notice that the original path at `/`, or _the root_, now has nothing configured. A client visiting this URL causes the function to throw an exception. To fix this, use `itty-router`'s `all` method, which acts as a catch-all for any routes not explicitly handled by other route handlers. Return a new `404 Not Found` response for any route not recognized:
```

```js
---
filename: index.js
highlight: [5]
---
router.get('/users', async () => {
  // Existing code
})

router.all('*', () => new Response("Not Found", { status: 404 }))
```

> The second planned route is `GET /users/:id`, which returns a single user based on their ID. Configure another route, which uses _parameters_ to capture part of the URL, and makes it available as part of the route handler as an object `params`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The second planned route is `GET /users/:id`, which returns a single user based on their ID. Configure another route, which uses _parameters_ to capture part of the URL, and make it available as part of the route handler as an object `params`:
```

```js
---
filename: index.js
highlight: [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]
---
router.get('/users/:id', async ({ params }) => {
  const { id } = params
  const { data, error } = await client
    .from('users')
    .select()
    .eq('id', id)

  if (error) throw error

  const user = data.length ? data[0] : null

  return new Response(JSON.stringify({ user }), {
    headers: { 'content-type': 'application/json' },
    status: user ? 200 : 404
  })
})
```

Deploy the function again with `wrangler publish` to allow looking up users based on their ID, such as `/users/1`. If there is a user in the database with that given ID, you will get a JSON response (with a status of `200 OK`) containing the user data, otherwise the JSON response will be a `null` value (with a status of `404 Not Found`):

```json
---
header: JSON object for a found user based on ID
---
{"user":{"id":1,"name":"Kristian"}}
```

```json
---
header: Empty JSON object when no user is found
---
{"user":null}
```

### Creating new users

> To complete the function, create a third endpoint, which creates users from your Workers + PostgREST API. The route will accept `POST` requests to `/users`, with a JSON payload containing the data to save in your database. For instance, if the `users` table contains a `name` value, sending a JSON payload to the PostgREST API with the format `{"name":"Kristian"}` will create a new user with a name of "Kristian".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To complete the function, create a third endpoint, which creates users from your Workers + PostgREST API. The route will accept `POST` requests to `/users`, with a JSON payload containing the data to save in your database. For example, if the `users` table contains a `name` value, sending a JSON payload to the PostgREST API with the format `{"name":"Kristian"}` will create a new user with a name of "Kristian".
```

In the Workers function, implement this by setting up a new `post` handler, and parsing the request _body_ (the data being sent as part of the request) as JSON inside of that handler:

```js
---
filename: index.js
---
router.post('/users', async request => {
  const userData = await request.json()
})
```

With that data available as `userData`, use the `insert` function to create a new user in your database. `postgrest-js` returns the new user back from PostgREST, which can be returned as the JSON response back to the client:

```js
---
filename: index.js
highlight: [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]
---
router.post('/users', async request => {
  const userData = await request.json()
  const { data: user, error } = await client
    .from('users')
    .insert([userData])

  if (error) throw error

  return new Response(JSON.stringify({ user }), {
    headers: { 'content-type': 'application/json' },
  })
})
```

> Deploy the updated function using `wrangler publish`. To test this new endpoint, you will use `cURL`, a command-line tool for making requests. Copy the below command, replacing the base part of the URL with your unique Workers.dev deployment. This command sends JSON data to your new endpoint as a `POST` request, which is parsed by the Workers function, and used to create a new user in your database. The response back should be the new user you have created:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Deploy the updated function using `wrangler publish`. To test this new endpoint, use `cURL`, a command-line tool for making requests. Copy the below command, replacing the base part of the URL with your unique Workers.dev deployment. This command sends JSON data to your new endpoint as a `POST` request, which is parsed by the Workers function, and used to create a new user in your database. The response back should be the new user you have created:
```

```sh
---
header: Creating a new user using cURL
---
$ curl https://postgrest-worker-example.signalnerve.workers.dev/users -X POST -H "Content-type: application/json" -d '{"name": "Dog"}'
{"user":{"id":2,"name":"Dog"}}
```

## Conclusion

> In this tutorial, you have used PostgREST, `postgrest-js`, and Cloudflare Workers to build a serverless API for your PostgreSQL database. This architecture provides an infinitely-scaling and secure approach to interfacing between your databases and your frontend applications, while still retaining the control and flexibility of avoiding lock-in to Database-as-a-Service tools and other complicated SDKs for data management.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you have used PostgREST, `postgrest-js`, and Cloudflare Workers to build a serverless API for your PostgreSQL database. This architecture provides an infinitely-scaling and secure approach to interfacing between your databases and your front-end applications, while still retaining the control and flexibility of avoiding lock-in to Database-as-a-Service tools and other complicated SDKs for data management.
```

> If you enjoyed this tutorial, you might enjoy some of the other tutorials we have for Cloudflare Workers—check them out!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you found this tutorial useful, refer to some of our other Cloudflare Workers tutorials below. 
```

To publish this function, run `wrangler publish`:

```sh
---
header: Publish the Workers function
---
$ wrangler publish
✨  Built successfully, built project size is 3 KiB.
✨  Successfully published your script to
 https://postgrest-worker-example.signalnerve.workers.dev
```

To correctly configure the function, set a `POSTGREST_ENDPOINT` "secret", which tells Workers where to actually route requests to. `wrangler secret` is a command that sets an encrypted value, or a "secret", that is only available inside of the Workers function:

```sh
$ wrangler secret put POSTGREST_ENDPOINT
Enter the secret text you'd like assigned to the variable POSTGREST_ENDPOINT on the script named postgrest-worker-example:
**************
🌀  Creating the secret for script name postgrest-worker-example
✨  Success! Uploaded secret POSTGREST_ENDPOINT.
```

Visit the Workers function in browser (such as `https://postgrest-worker-example.signalnerve.workers.dev`). It returns a simple JSON array of your PostgreSQL data:

```json
---
header: JSON array returning from PostgREST in a Workers function
---
[{"id":1,"name":"Kristian"}]
```

### Adding a router

> To make this project more interesting, you will add a router to handle multiple potential paths in the application. The application will have one path which returns _all_ users, a path that returns a single user _based on ID_, and a path that accepts data and creates a user. The URL structure will look like this:

Reviewer 3: @signalnerve What is your opinion my above suggestion?
